helm processing info (#630)
replicatedhq/kots.io: content/vendor/helm/helm-processing.md

---
date: 2020-01-03
linktitle: "Helm Processing"
title: Helm Processing
weight: 20590
---

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Author: I felt like without the line breaks, the paragraphs were too thick and started to become a wall of text.  Including an empty line between the sentences disrupted the flow, so this seemed like a good happy medium.  For your plugin, is it possible to exclude .md files?  The preferred method for new lines is double-whitespace https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#line-breaks

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer: with text wrapping, i've never felt like it reads poorly and consecutive lines without double line breaks render to single paragraphs, right? it's just personal preference though so i suggest leaving as is

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Author: Double whitespace at the end of the line means "new line in this paragraph".  So these sentences are separated by a single line break on the page, like this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/83238463/145616389-97bcb591-e728-4b69-999f-347255802f03.png)

Helps break the wall of text feel of the paragraphs, I think

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 2: I use Atom as my preferred editor and it automatically deletes trailing whitespaces when you commit a file.

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 2: For the line breaks, if we're trying to split the paragraph for clarity and to give the reader space ....the general default is to create 2 paragraphs vs moving a new sentence to the next line.

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Author: I can replace the double spaces with <br> as suggested by the markdown guide (https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#line-breaks) if that's preferred.  Though if markdown officially supports trailing whitespace as a formatting function, you could look into excluding .md files from the auto-formatting in atom, like: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/83238463/145617625-c07dda7c-c007-4cc2-b470-1c094607ae5f.png)

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Author: I've restructured the PR to eliminate all single line breaks.

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 3: The new naming is somewhat TBD so let's keep what we're doing now and adjust it all at once I think. Right now, the leading candidates are: 
"_Installing via Helm_" (to replace native)
"_Installing via kubectl apply_" (to replace replicated kots helm)

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense if we explain _why_ it doesn't rely on tiller? The real reason is because replicated is creating the resources not helm (via apply) afaik, right?

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 3: @jonquil2002  I haven't bounced these off of docs team yet - my apologies for that. These were the product of a few discussions with leadership; the goal is to 'soften' our language a bit with helm as the current names may imply too much detail.

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 4: @JustinN-Replicated  No worries, But it looks like Sammi has picked this up for review, so I'll leave it to her.

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 3: @samantha-replicated please review the mention above; it has been a challenge to find the 'right' names but worth sharing the latest with you all else considering.

> The Replicated Helm installation is compatible with both Helm V2 and Helm V3 as it does not rely on Tiller to deploy the chart into the cluster.  

Reviewer 2: I agree with updating the naming conventions in one swoop vs now. I like `Installing with Helm`, I think it's encompassing enough to cover all of our helm options without being too descriptive in the title. And as a top-level heading it gives you more flexibility for nesting various related content beneath it. It also helps bucket the content into a category via the TOC, so users can scan it and dig into the Helm content vs questioning what "type" of helm installation then need to read first. 

The 2nd option is a little sticky for me. Speaking purely from a UX perspective in the docs. Would a user read that title and know what that means? If we write an overview topic to introduce it first, then It should be ok. Something like, "We have 2 different helm installs.....this does.....that does..." Then a task topic for each install would nest nicely there. Without that, the title doesn't standalone as clearly. With no reference to Helm in the title, someone scanning the TOC looking for that info would likely pass it on first glance. We also run into SEO ramifications possibly if they are googling how to install with Helm and not hitting this topic as a result.

After Replicated templating is processed on the `values.yaml` file, all files from the original Helm tarball are written to the `base/charts/` directory, maintaining the original directory structure of the Helm Chart.  
A `kustomization.yaml` file is included in each chart and subchart directory. This is used later to merge kustomization instructions up to the chart resources.

* Example base and base/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml with the default postgresql chart:  
![Base directory example for Native Helm charts](/images/native-helm-base.png)

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization
resources:
- secrets.yaml
- statefulset.yaml
- svc-headless.yaml
- svc.yaml
```
   
   
3) **Write Midstream Files**  
The directory structure in `base/charts` is copied to `overlays/midstream/charts`.  
Replicated searches all manifests for private images. These images are added to a `kustomization.yaml` file, which is written at the chart or subchart level matching the resource being kustomized.  

> For example, if the postgres image is found at `base/charts/postgres/templates/deployment.yaml`, the `kustomization.yaml` to overwrite the image will be added to `overlays/midstream/charts/postgres/kustomization.yaml`.  This midstream kustomization has a `bases` entry that points to the corresponding `kustomization.yaml` file from `base`. (Picture)

Reviewer: `(Picture)` ?

Author: placeholder, removed :)

## Helm V3

KOTS will check the apiVersion supplied in the Chart.yaml file of the Helm Chart to check if Helm V3 is necessary. By default (if Chart.yaml is not supplied or apiVersion is not present), KOTS will use Helm V2 to process all Helm Charts to create deployable YAML. Optionally, in the KOTS [`HelmChart`](https://kots.io/reference/v1beta1/helmchart/) resource an API version may be specified. When the `helmVersion` property is set to `"v3"`, KOTS will use Helm V3 to process the Helm Chart.

> In the future KOTS may be updated to use Helm V3 by default.

Author: This was already on the page before I added my content.  I agree it's probably not worth stating here, I think we've worked past this at a technical level by automatically detecting the chart version anyway.

Since it has already been on the page for some time, are we OK to remove this, or does that become another discussion?

> In the future KOTS may be updated to use Helm V3 by default.

Reviewer 3: Do we explicitly state that we use v2 by default? If not, we should. This alludes to that fact also it may be unexpected that this is the case since v2 is EOL (I am presuming we have not changed because it could be a breaking change?)

> In the future KOTS may be updated to use Helm V3 by default.

Author: technically, if left undefined and on a version of KOTS later than 1.42 or something, we will auto-detect the Helm version and use what the chart requires.  So the real `default` is "we'll figure it out and use the right one"

> In the future KOTS may be updated to use Helm V3 by default.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this is the place to mention that, though we should be specific about detecting v2 and v3 only (IE to pre-empt next version of chart when v4 comes out).
Should we do one of those note/callouts about the version where this changed in KOTS as well and allude to old behavior too?

> In the future KOTS may be updated to use Helm V3 by default.

Reviewer 2: I reviewed another PR recently from Todd where he was updating some Helm pages and Vera had called out that V2 was used by default and we ensured that was stated in that doc. I'd have to go search, but we did state that somewhere in the helm docs.

Processing Helm charts for Replicated App Manager is accomplished with five high-level steps.

1) **Check for Previous Installations of the Chart**

Replicated checks previous versions of the installed app, checking if the chart has been installed previously without Native Helm.

This step ensures the app manager will not attempt a Native Helm install of a chart that has already been deployed by the App Manager without Native Helm. We do not yet support migrating existing app installations to Native Helm installations. If this check fails, the following error will be displayed:
```
Deployment method for chart <chart> has changed
```
Until migrations are supported, the recommended path is removing the application from the Replicated App Manager and installing fresh with Native Helm. This will cause data loss as PVCs will be removed in the process.
   
   
2) **Write Base Files**

The Helm manifests are extracted, rendered with Replicated templating, and added to `base/charts`.

> Replicated's [`HelmChart` spec](https://kots.io/reference/v1beta1/helmchart/) allows declaring ConfigOptions to [overwrite a chart's values](https://kots.io/reference/v1beta1/helmchart/#values). This allows vendors to surface a chart's values options inside of the Replicated Config page. After Replicated templating is processed on the `values.yaml` file, all files from the original Helm tarball are written to the `base/charts/` directory, maintaining the original directory structure of the Helm Chart. A `kustomization.yaml` file is included in each chart and subchart directory. This is used later to merge kustomization instructions up to the chart resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replicated's [`HelmChart` spec](https://kots.io/reference/v1beta1/helmchart/) can be modified to allow the `ConfigOptions` to [overwrite a chart's values](https://kots.io/reference/v1beta1/helmchart/#values). This allows vendors to surface a chart's value options inside the Replicated Config page. After Replicated templating is processed on the `values.yaml` file, all files from the original Helm tarball are written to the `base/charts/` directory, maintaining the original directory structure of the Helm Chart. A `kustomization.yaml` file is included in each chart and sub chart directory. This is used later to merge kustomization instructions up to the chart resources.
```

> * Example base and base/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml with the default postgresql chart:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example**
In this example, a `base` directory is illustrated and the `base/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml` includes the default postgresql chart:
```

Author: ```suggestion
**Example**
	In this example, a `base` directory is illustrated and the `base/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml` targets chart resources:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization
resources:
- secrets.yaml
- statefulset.yaml
- svc-headless.yaml
- svc.yaml
```
   
   
3) **Write Midstream Files**

Midstream contains Replicated kustomize instructions for all deployed resources, such as imagePullSecrets, image proxies, and backup labels.

The directory structure in `base/charts` is copied to `overlays/midstream/charts`. Replicated searches all manifests for private images. These images are added to a `kustomization.yaml` file, which is written at the chart or subchart level matching the resource being kustomized. For example, if the postgres image is found at `base/charts/postgres/templates/deployment.yaml`, the `kustomization.yaml` to overwrite the image will be added to `overlays/midstream/charts/postgres/kustomization.yaml`. This midstream kustomization has a `bases` entry that points to the corresponding `kustomization.yaml` file from `base`. Other midstream kustomizations are processed here as well, such as backup label transformers and image pull secrets. They are appended to the same file as above for each chart and subchart.

> * Example midstream and overlays/midstream/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml with the default postgresql chart:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example**
In this example, a `midstream` directory is illustrated and the `overlays/midstream/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml` includes the default postgresql chart:
```

Author: ```suggestion
**Example**
	In this example, a `midstream` directory is illustrated and the `overlays/midstream/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml` adds Replicated customization:
```

![Midstream directory example for Native Helm charts](/images/native-helm-midstream.png)

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
bases:
- ../../../../base/charts/postgresql
commonAnnotations:
  kots.io/app-slug: native-helm-test
images:
- name: gcr.io/replicated-qa/postgresql
  newName: proxy.replicated.com/proxy/native-helm-test/gcr.io/replicated-qa/postgresql
kind: Kustomization
patchesStrategicMerge:
- pullsecrets.yaml
resources:
- secret.yaml
transformers:
- backup-label-transformer.yaml
```
   
   
4) **Write Downstream Files**

Replicated allows last-mile customization on Helm resources using downstream kustomize files. 

As above, the directory structure in `base/charts` is copied to `overlays/downstream/this-cluster/charts`. Each chart and subchart directory receives a `kustomization.yaml`. These files only have `bases` defined, which points to the corresponding `midstream` kustomization file from step 3. These downstream `kustomization.yaml` files can be edited before deploying the application. Any kustomize instructions here will take priority over `midstream` and `base` kustomizations.

> * Example downstream and overlays/downstream/this-cluster/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml with the default postgresql chart:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example**
In this example, a `downstream` directory is illustrated and the `overlays/downstream/this-cluster/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml` includes the default postgresql chart:
```

Author: ```suggestion
**Example**
	In this example, a `downstream` directory is illustrated and the `overlays/downstream/this-cluster/charts/postgresql/kustomization.yaml` provides a template for last-mile overrides:
```

KOTS will check the apiVersion supplied in the Chart.yaml file of the Helm Chart to check if Helm V3 is necessary. By default (if Chart.yaml is not supplied or apiVersion is not present), KOTS will use Helm V2 to process all Helm Charts to create deployable YAML.
Optionally, in the KOTS [`HelmChart`](https://kots.io/reference/v1beta1/helmchart/) resource an API version may be specified. When the `helmVersion` property is set to `"v3"`, KOTS will use Helm V3 to process the Helm Chart.

> In the future as Helm V2 is removed from Helm support, KOTS may be updated to use Helm V3 by default.

Reviewer 3: Helm v2 has already been removed from helm support: https://helm.sh/blog/helm-v2-deprecation-timeline/
I think we can just leave the line as it was.
